So let's go to one more thing.
So let's talk about holey arrays.
These are my favorite because they're
not holy as in religious, they're holey,
as in they have holes inside of them.
Okay, and okay, so
let's talk about them first.
So imagine you write something like this.
You say array, 1, 2, and then you leave
a space over there and put three.
Now, you would think so
if you read the, let's see, so 0, 1, 2.
If you read location 2,
you'd get undefined.
And you might think that what
actually happened was that you have
undefined in this location.
But that is not what's actually happening.
What's happening is that you have a hole.
And if you try to read that location,
you will go up the prototype chain to
the object array and
see what's at the location 2.
And if there is some value at location 2,
then you will get something
other than undefined.
Now you can see how arrays with
holes might be a problem for
the optimizer, right?
Because if you know ahead of time that
you have just an array of numbers,
the access and
manipulation is so much cheaper.
Cuz if you've to add things together, you
know it's perfectly safe to read the value
and put it on the register and add it to
something and move on with your life.
On the other hand, if you have an array
that can have many different shapes
inside of it, then you can't
just read the value and do this.
First of all, you know that if
you read the value between 0 and
the length of the array, it is safe
to go and access out of the memory.
But if you read outside of the length,
then you need to use prototype
chain to resolve it to undefined.
And this is the weird part, you actually
have to go through a prototype chain.
Because if you don't, there could be
something in a prototype on location 7,
and then you read 7 and
your array is only six size.
So you think you'd get on the you don't.
You get whatever is at the prototype of 7.
And so it kind of becomes, basically,
this particular operation becomes tricky.
This adding, because you might get,
sorry, the reading part becomes tricky
because you might get weird
values out of the system.
So when you do something like this,
when you say that you're gonna put
-3 at location 2, when you go and
read this particular bit right here,
you're gonna get -3.
And you can see how it ruins the day for
the optimizer.
So, what happens in JavaScript
is that even though you have
one exact type of array, right?
There's only one thing called
an array as far as you're concerned.
Internally the V8 has lots of
different types for arrays.
It basically tracks things and says, hey,
is this an array of nothing but integers?
If so, there's a special subclass for it.
You can't see it as a developer, but
the the VM does because it knows that
it can do all kinds of optimization.
If you can promise me that that
particular array will have nothing but
numbers inside of it,
I can do a bunch of other things.
There are specified arrays for
numbers, specified arrays for
floating point numbers.
There is specified arrays for
mixed types, so
that meaning you can have objects
and/or numbers inside of it.
And everything else has also additional
subclass called the holey arrays,
which is the array that could
have a hole inside of it, okay?
And these holey arrays are bane of your
existence in terms of performance,
because they will cause
all kinds of problems.
And the reason why they cause problems
is because the generated code can't just
assume that if I read the value, I'm good.
It has to be like, I read the value,
I got the special undefined value here.
I better check the prototype chain just
in case there is something in there.
And so prototype access will become so
much slower.
And so, how can this possibly work?
So the way this works is that, again,
you have this hidden class for an array,
right?
And this hidden class kinda
has an index of as before, and
you have a special symbol called a HOLE.
It's a special value that you recognize
like, that's not a real value,
that's a hole, right?
There's no holes in memory,
you can't do that.
But you can put special values that
you will recognize, like, yeah,
that's actually pretend to
be a hole over here, right?
And so then you can create your objects.
You can fill it with values, right?
And then you can also fill it with holes.
Where is a hole here?
A hole, where am I using it?
I don't know, right?
But hey, the point is, the code that you
kind of have to create is something like
this, where you iterate over the values,
and then you see, is it a hole?
If so, then you have to go down the rabbit
hole of the prototype chain, right?
So you read the value.
If the value you get is a hole, then you
have to do all this complicated stuff
about going up the prototype
chain to try to resolve it.
Otherwise, the value is just undefined,
right?
Do you see how it gets
complicated with this?
So holey arrays are kind
of a nice complication.
Now, how do you get holey arrays?
Well, I showed you.
The most obvious way is this way.
But you can also get holey
arrays by doing code like this.
You can say array = new Array(10).
That creates a holey array
with 10 holes in it.
And guess what?
Once the array is holey, all of
the derived arrays, if you perform a map
operation or something like that,
they will all be holey all the way down.
Holes all over them, yes?
>> If you do a new Array(10).fill and
fil it with undefined, is that then a new?
>> So, good question.
I know in the past it was holey for
the rest of its life.
I don't know what new VMs do,
whether they're smart enough to kinda
recognize this particular thing or not.
But there is a way to figure this out.
And let's do this, let's run a benchmark.
I have a benchmark on holey arrays.
What does the benchmark do?
Let's see, Let me remind myself.
All right, so
I have just array with numbers.
I have arrays of strings, and
what am I trying to do here?
For each one of them,
I am just trying to read the value, right?
So I'm just reading the value and
comparing it to the false.
Notice I'm using triple equals so
that we don't have any surprises.
So I have an array of numbers and
I'm just trying to iterate over it.
So iterating over numbers, as you can see,
is faster than iterating over strings.
Now I also have tried to subclass array
to create a different prototype chain.
And it looks like in the past, this
used to have a performance difference,
now it seems like they
perform just as well.
Good job V8, you seem to have fixed
this particular performance issue.
Mixed array, as you can see, is about 70.
Arrays with holes, look at that.
Now we're slower at
iterating over these things.
And arrays with holes that have things
on a prototype, bam, you get hit.
So it turns out that, and so here,
the way we've created this is I
created a subclass called MyArray.
And then in this subclass,
I messed with the prototype.
So not only does the VM keep track of the
fact whether or not the array has holes,
it also keeps track of the fact,
is the prototype chain pure?
In other words,
didn't anybody mess with it, right?
Because if nobody messed with it, then
it can just answer the question, right?
So in this particular case,
I've messed with the prototype
chain by putting something on it.
I put it on a 0th location.
But just by putting it anywhere, I have
basically made the whole thing dirty.
And so now when I deal with MyArray,
let's see,
when I create myArrayHoles
prototype right here.
When I put holes into it, so that's
another way of putting holes into it,
is you can directly set a value, right?
If you set a value past the end
you create a hole in the middle.
So if you have an empty array and
you say array value 10, then you
just have 10 holes and then position 10,
which is really 11th is now a value,
and so you made yourself a holey array,
congratulations.
So this is why, in general,
you should be using .push,
unless you're really really sure
that this is gonna work just fine.
And so just by the fact that I've,
yeah, and
this creates holes here because
I do it only every other one.
See now I have every other one is a hole,
right?
And so
most of the times when it reads the value,
it will just go to prototype chain
will receive undefined, right?
Except in the case of 0 it will get 0.
And so that alone is enough to
confuse the optimizer and the V8 so
much that it basically gives up and
generates these super slow code
that it knows is safe, right?
And so the reason in performance that
you see here is what you're looking at
are different assumptions that were
violated for the optimizer, right?
So the code right here, the super
slow code that was generated here,
this is where all the assumptions
are off the table,
and the V8 actually has to do everything
by the book to get you the answer, right?
All the other ones that you see here
are tricks that the V8 knows it
is safe to play as long as
certain invariants are true.
And so this is why you can have
a different performance in it.
And if you compare this to,
that's what, like,
that's a 10x difference in
performance of iteration speed.
That's big, right?
Now, luckily, the the Deopt Explorer
will tell you about this.
Mark question, yes?
>> Yeah, online they're asking about,
why did the engine implement
it this way with holes instead
of filling it with undefined?
>> Because that's what the spec says,
right?
The spec of JavaScript says that this is
the bizarre behavior you need to get.
So the, [SOUND] Memory,
no, not this memory.
This memory, holding memory.
Here, the spec says that in this situation
where you have a holey array and
on prototype you put the value 2.
If you try to access array 2,
if you say array, If I can type,
where you say this,
then the answer should be -3.
That's what the spec says, right?
So the VM has to implement
this bizarre behavior.
Now, you should never
write code like this.
If you do, and I'm your manager,
we probably should have a chat.
[LAUGH] You're trying to be
a little little too clever, but
the VM has no choice, right?
It has to follow the spec.
And if you remember, for a while,
we had this thing called MooTools,
which went viled, I guess,
before jQuery days.
So maybe this was a long time ago.
This is ancient history, archeology.
But MooTools would modify prototypes
left and right all over the place.
>> And there was a library
before that called prototype.
>> Well,
there was a prototype before that, right?
They would just modify these things.
And so the VMs, to this day,
need to implement the correct behavior.
Because, what if you come to a website
that still uses one of these old things,
and I'm sure there are websites out
there that still use this thing, right?
And so you have to behave correctly.
And so the answer is here
is -3 if you do array of 2,
even though there's a hole, right?
That's sort of why we call it a hole,
not an undefined,
because you can see through
it to the other side.
And the thing that's on
the other side is a prototype.
Now the fun thing is,
the way the Javascript is
implemented is that even
though you are reading
the value 2,
it gets converted to a string 2.
Everything is a string
as if it was a string.
So all these reads pretend to be strings.
And so
array of 2 really gives you this string 2.
Crazy, right?
So the VMs basically have to do it because
that's what the spec says they have to do,
right?
That's kind of the thing about JavaScript,
Is there a lot of ugly parts to it that
nobody in their right mind should be
using.
But these ugly parts kind of define what
is and isn't possible for the VMs to do.
And VMs, for the most part,
cheat in a sense that they hope
that you won't do those bad things.
And they have flags that basically say,
did you do the bad thing?
You didn't?
Good,
I can do the short circuit code, right?
Which is why it is possible to do a bad
thing in one place in the codebase,
and ruin the performance of some other
piece of code somewhere else, right?
You're thinking, I'm gonna add
something to prototype chain.
Let's add to the prototype chain.
And all of a sudden the VM's like, I can't
do all these optimizations that I did.
And the code over there becomes slow.
And somebody then screams at you and
says, why is the code slow, right?
Like, I just added this completely
unrelated to your code.
Well, it could be related.
So this is kind of the the downfall of
kind of the JavaScript VMs is that,
the kind of tricks VMs
use changes over time.
And the tricks they use are really driven
by the patterns that the developers use in
their codebase, right?
So if you use a particular
pattern long enough and
becomes popular enough in the web,
then it's likely that some optimization
trick will be inside of the VM to
kind of take advantage of that.
The performance of dynamic systems like
JavaScript is basically unknown until you
have the whole program, right?
We showed you how deoptimization
can mess with you.
For example, you could read a property
off of a prototype like map.
And so map is now inlinable because it's
always the same map that you're getting
all the time.
Until you run MooTools and in monkey
patches map to do something else and
all of a sudden your code is like, I
thought it was constant, it isn't, deopt,
and all kinds of things change.
Okay, so but
let's look at the Deopt Explorer.
And let's go into, why is holey,
because it's not recent.
Okay, open file,
Profile > holey-arrays, here we go.
So this thing should tell us about the
holey arrays, let's see how good it is.
Okay, so here's our benchmark and
Here we go.
Here it is, this is the moment,
see how it's read?
It's really not liking this.
And so if you hover over it, you can
see the classes that go underneath it.
And you can see that it's the same one,
and
you should be able to see
the fact that it has holes.
Okay, here we go, the element
type it's HOLEY_ELEMENTS, right?
So you can actually see this
information in the system.
And so you can see the performance,
the de-optimization system basically tells
you, hey, I saw this particular thing,
this is what you actually have over here.
And so you wanna avoid anything
that is of kind holey anything,
because that creates problems for
the system.
I'm wondering if there's more stuff here.
So these are the maps, right?
The maps basically show the kinda
objects that are in the system.
And you can see,
this is because we created our own array,
this is our own array,
this was our own instance, right?
This is what it is.
You can see how many functions are in the
system, how many object shapes existed.
In this particular case there
was only one object shape.
But it gives you an idea.
So the maps are V8's way of
calling it the object shapes.
So hidden classes basically translates
to what they call now maps.
Originally it was called hidden classes,
then I guess they changed it to maps.
And the tool actually gives you
a pretty good view of what happened and
where it happened.
So, you can, for example, see here when
the transitions are happening, right?
You can see specific location in
the codebase where this particular
class decided, nope, I am no longer
a regular array, I am now a holey array.
It was on line 20 of the code, right?
And you can see the transitioning
that are happening in your system.
So this is a way kind of to debug and
kind of figure out,
if you really wanna go deep onto it.
Normally, I would not go here until
I have a piece of code that I really
know is hot piece of code that
really needs every single point of
performance extracted out of it.
Then I would kinda look into these tools,
usually I would not.
Questions, yes?
>> What sort of hot pieces of code
that you really need to dig into
would you find yourself using this for
most often, when you're?
>> So in Angular we transition
to something called Ivy,
I don't know if you,
some of you have Angular backgrounds.
Okay, so Ivy was basically kind
of a rewrite of the runtime and
compile time,
specifically to make sure that the code
we generate would be
monomorphic in all cases.
And the reasoning was actually twofold.
One is, first of all, I showed you why
you don't wanna have megamorphic code.
But also if you end up
with megamorphic code,
you are putting pressure
on the second level cache.
And if you're putting pressure
on second level cache,
that means the your application
code now runs slower, right?
And so the idea was that by doing
something like Ivy, not only do you get
better performance in terms of executing
all these data bindings, but you also get
better performance because you're no
longer putting pressure on the second
level cache, and now that cache can make
your application code actually go faster.
And we have seen,
pretty over the cross the board
performance improvements with Ivy.
So there's a lot of benefits to it.
It was a humongous undertaking, though,
and I wouldn't wanna do it ever again.
But that's a place where all of
these things mattered, right?
So we would look with these tools and
be like, okay,
are we generating code that could
potentially produce a megamorphic reads,
which means inline caching can't
be used or anything like that.
And so
these are the tricks that we would use.